Before launching into examples of row summaries or you might say row groups, I want to motivate the need for row summaries and provide an overview of the select statement features for row summaries. Because tables can detain many rows, it is often useful to see statistics about groups of rows rather than just individual row details. For example, you might want to see the average GPA of students in selected majors. The select statement allows statistical or aggregate functions to be computed and shown for groups rows. Almost any kind of statistical function can be used to summarize groups rows. Because this is not a statistics course, we will use only simple aggregate functions such as count, minimum, maximum average and some. The select statement also supports conditions involving statistical or aggregate functions. For example, a common condition for row summaries is to ensure that the number of rows in the group is greater than a threshold, such as 30. Decision making with small samples can be unreliable. As you will see in examples in the remainder of this lesson, SQL has keywords for aggregate functions such as AVG for average. The select statement has the group by clause to list grouping columns and the having clause for conditions on groups of rows. Let's begin with examples that compare select statements with individual rows in the result versus rows summaries in the result. Example one, list the salary of each faculty member, sorting by rank allows the result to be easily compared to a similar result with row summaries. Example two shows rows summaries with each result row showing the rank and average salary of the rank. The first rank in the result, associate professors summarizes the first two rows In example one. The average salary of 72,500 is the average of 70,075,000. You should be able to trace the second and third rows an example three and in example two. It's a style note, aggregate functions should be renamed otherwise a non meaningful name may be generated by the sequel compiler. One example two is executed without renaming the oracle sequel compiler generates a reasonable name, but other sequel compilers may not generate reasonable names. Examples three and four depict the difference between row conditions and group conditions. Row conditions are specified in the where clause, group conditions are specified in the having clause. Example three shows the average GPA for each major. The average GPA is only calculated for juniors and seniors according to the condition in the where clause. Example four extends example three with a having clause. Example for restricts groups two majors with an average GPA greater than 3.1. The having clause must be used for group conditions. A group condition compares an aggregate function result to a value or an expression. Examples five and six extend example four to depict syntax errors with where and having clauses. Example five contains a misplaced row condition in the having clause. The error messages by the oracle and postgres SQL compilers, indicate a problem with the ST class condition in the having clause. Example six contains a misplaced row summary condition in the where clause. Their messages by the oracle and postgres SQL compilers indicate a problem with the A V. G condition in the where clause avoid these errors by placing road conditions without aggregate functions in the where clause and rose summary conditions with aggregate functions in the having clause To avoid confusion among the various clauses in the select statement, you should understand the evaluation order among the clauses row operations in the from and where clauses perceived group operations in the group by and having clauses. The final operations of sorting the rows in the order by clause and generating two columns in the result. That's the select clause occur after row in group operations, sequel compilers follow this evaluation order although they may perform many optimizations to improve performance. The evaluation order has several lessons. These lessons can be useful on more difficult problems, especially problems that combine joints and grouping that you will see in module five, you should remember that row operations. Percy grew up group operations. If a select statement does not produce desired results, you should usually look at row operations in the FROM and where clauses. First Grouping only occurs one time. This limitation is only a problem on specialized queries that need to have independent groupings. This limitation can be resolved through other features of the select statement but these extensions will not be covered in this course. If a select statement does not produce correct results, you should consider using small sample tray tables to trace the result. Using small tables is tedious but it can be helpful when initially learning query formulation or when facing a difficult problem. Let's wrap up lesson five about the group by clause summarization queries are common in business intelligence due to the usage of summary data for tactical and strategic decision making This lesson. Bould examples of the group by and having clauses four rows summaries. The group by clause identifies columns to summarize by and having clause contains conditions involving aggregate functions like the count function. Ask you all compilers perform grouping specified in the group by and having clauses after joins and road conditions specified in the from and where clauses. Now let me return to the opening question about the limitations of the group by clause for business intelligence. The group by and having clauses provide rudimentary capability for generating rose summaries. These clauses support simple statistical calculations by one or more business factors. Business intelligence requires more sub totals than the group by clause supports. So that results can be shown in varying levels of details. Business intelligence also requires more complex analytical calculations involving ranking cumulative distributions and moving groups of rows for statistical calculations such as moving averages. 