Welcome to lesson four of module four on basic query formulation with SQL. I'm going to start with a question related to the way that joint operations are written in the SQL select statement. Which joint style do you prefer?
Play video starting at ::26 and follow transcript0:26
This lesson extends the coverage of the joint operator from lesson three. In this lesson you will see examples of select statements with two different styles to write joint operations. This lesson has practical objectives for using joint operations in the SQL select statement. You should be able to write select statements using both joint styles. In addition you should be able to provide natural language explanations to document select statements containing both joint styles. We will continue using the university database that was first introduced in module two. When formulating problems involving the joint operator to combine tables, you should know the relationships of the database diagram. We will see select statements that combine the faculty offering and course tables using joint operations. The university database diagram indicates that faculty and offering can be joined on fact number and course in offering can be joined on course number.
Play video starting at :1:30 and follow transcript1:30
The select statement provides several ways to specify zone operations. This lesson provides examples of two important ways to specify joint operations. The cross product style, list tables in the FROM clause and join conditions in the WHERE clause is shown as an example 1. Example1, shows a select statement to retrieve the OfferNo, CourseNo, and FacFirstName and FacLastName. For assistant professors teaching information systems courses that is IS percent symbol, course offerings in fall 2019. Note that the FROM clause contains the offering and faculty tables and the wear condition contains a joint condition in the last line of the statement.
Play video starting at :2:19 and follow transcript2:19
The clause product style is easy to read but does not support a less used way to combine tables known as the outer joint operator. All tables required in a statement can be easily found by examining the FROM clause. Note that, the order of tables in the FROM clause and conditions in the WHERE clause are not important. The SQL compiler will determine a good execution plan for the statement regardless of the order of tables and joint conditions. However, you should be careful to ensure that the joint condition is not Omitted in the WHERE clause. Omitting the joint condition, the WHERE clause will provide incorrect results and consume large amounts of computing resources to compute the cross product operation containing all pairs of rows from each table, not just the matching rows. The joint operator style, list joint operations in the FROM clause using the inner join and on key words. Example 2 shows a select statement to retrieve the OfferNo, CourseNo, and FacName, first and last name for assistant professors teaching information systems course offerings in fall 2019. Example 2 produces the same result as example 1. Note that, the FROM clause contains an explicit joint operation combining the offer and faculty tables on the joint condition. The WHERE clause does not contain the joint condition. The joint operator style can be somewhat difficult to read for statements with many joint operations, but it supports out of joint operations, although we will not study the outer joint operator in the standard part of this course.
Play video starting at :4:4 and follow transcript4:04
Note that the order joint operations in the front claws is not important. The SQL compiler will determine a good execution plan for the statement regardless of the order of joint operations in a select statement. When combining multiple tables in a select statement, you need to be careful with name qualification. Column names used in a statement must be qualified with its table name if the column name alone is ambiguous. Ambiguity occurs the same unqualified column name occurs in more than one table in a statement. Typically qualifications required for joint conditions, it was the primary key and foreign key had the same unqualified name. Now, let's look at an example of name qualification. An example 2, FacNno must be qualified with this table name whenever referenced because it is ambiguous when used alone. Note that, you could qualify any column name in a statement. Qualification can make a statement easier to read but longer to write. If column names include an abbreviation of the table name, the readability argument is not strong. However, this naming convention involving a table name abbreviation as part of the column name may not be used in practice. Now, let's look at two more examples in each joint style with three tables in the statements. Example 3, list details about Leonard vince's teaching schedule in fall 2019. Example 3 combines a faculty, course and offering tables using the cross product style. Note that, the FROM clause contains three tables and the WHERE clause contains two joint conditions. Typically a select statement with end tables should have N -1 joint conditions. This formula is a practical check on your work. Omitting a joint condition is a serious error, causing both incorrect results and high levels of resource consumption. I want you to note another subtle aspect of example three The faculty table is required a from clause, even though no columns from the faculty table appear in the result. The faculty table is needed because the where clause contains conditions to test against rose at the faculty table, A table is needed in the front claws. If columns in the table appear in the result or conditions with columns of the table appear in the where clause, Example, for produces the identical result as example, three Example, four uses the joint operator style with two joint operations in the front claws, The front claws a little more difficult to read because it contains joint operations, not just a list of tables. However, students typically do not omit joint conditions with a joint operator style because joint conditions are part of the joint operations. Note that the order of joint operations is not important as the SQL compiler will decide on the most efficient order of joining the tables. Let's wrap up this lesson about two styles for joint operations in select statements, The cross product style uses both the from and wear clauses to specify joint operations. The joint operator style uses the from clause to express joint operations. Both styles provide explicit specification of joint conditions instead of the implicit specification of the natural joint operator. The cross product style makes tables in the statement easier to see that both the from and where clauses must be examined to see joint operations. The choice of joint style is largely a matter of personal preference. You should be comfortable reading and writing statements using both styles. The joint operator is essential because business databases typically have many tables, extracting useful information typically requires more than one table. Sometimes many tables combined with joint operations, you're encouraged to work many examples to learn the syntax for writing select statements the joint tables. As you will see in Module five, knowledge of the database Diagram is essential. As a number of tables and a statement increases