Welcome to Lesson five of Module five. An extended query formulation with SQL. I'm going to start with an important question about the usage of the SQL modification statements. Why are they modification statements, insert, update and delete less widely used than the select statement at least less directly used. The first three lessons of module five provided guidelines for query formulation and usage of the guidelines and more realistic problems involving joints and grouping. This lesson covers other SQL statements to extend your SQL background for other courses in the specialization you will see the SQL modification statements insert, update, delete and courses two and three in the coverage of data integration. The objectives in this lesson relate to usage of the insert, update and delete statements. You should be able to write basic examples with each statement using a single table. Variations beyond basic examples of these statements are not covered in this course. The modification statements support adding new rows, insert changing column values in one more existing rows, update and removing one more rows delete. Although well designed and powerful. They're not as widely used as a select statement in a direct way by users writing modification statements. Custom data entry forms are easier for most users so there's not much need to write modification statements directly. Instead, custom code written by programmers and co generators create modification SQL statements to support custom data entry forms. Thus, modification statements are typically generated by a cogeneration tool or written inside a host computer program to manage a custom made entry form. The insert statement has two formats. One for inserting single Rose and the other for inserting multiple rows. This course covers the basic format for inserting single rose. Course three will cover the format for inserting multiple rows in the basic format. One road of time can be added. You specify values for each column with the values clause. When using the insert statement, you must format constant values appropriate for each column. Refer to the documentation of your DBMS for details about specifying constants, especially date constants specifying no value for column is also not standard across tv messes. In some systems, you simply admit the column name and the value in other systems. You specify a particular symbol for no value. Of course you must be careful that the table definition permits no values for the column of interest. Otherwise insert statement will be rejected. The update statement allows one more rose to be changed. Any number of columns can be changed although typically only one columnist at a time has changed. When changing the primary key update rules on reference roads may not allow the operation, so changing primary key values should be avoided if possible. Changing primary key values of a parent table is complex. If related child rows exist. The delete statement allows one more rose to be removed. Delete a subject to the rules on reference Rose, for example, student role cannot be deleted If related enrollment rose exist and the deletion action is restrict. Typically rose in a child table should be deleted before associated roads and parent tables. Let's wrap up lesson five about using the SQL modification statements. The SQL insert, update and delete statements allow rose to be added, changed and removed. The modification statements are less widely used directly by users than the select statement. Most usage of the modification statements is indirect to support custom data entry forms. The modification statements can be created by co generating tools and programmers who embed SQL modification statements in a host computer program. In courses two and 3 you will see some uses and extensions to the SQL modification statements to support data integration processing. This lesson concludes module five. Except for less than six about query formulation errors. You should be prepared to complete the practice and graded problems for Mulele five, you can also try extra problems using the order entry database. The class website contains a document explaining the order entry database and the additional practice problems. You need lots of practice to master query formulation, an important skill for working with databases and user and information technology roles